feat: Astro 4.8 (#1084)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-480.mdx

To use this feature, [add a server build output](https://docs.astro.build/en/basics/rendering-modes/#on-demand-rendered) and enable the `experimental.actions` option in your Astro config:

```js
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
  output: "hybrid", // or 'server'
  experimental: {
    actions: true,
  },
});
```

Then, define actions in a `src/actions/index.ts` file using `defineAction()`. You can define actions that accept JSON or form requests, and the `handler` function will be called with your type-safe input.

Plus, no more casting `formData.get()` results. Astro will automatically parse form requests to objects using your Zod schema. Here's an example of a newsletter signup action:

```ts
// src/actions/index.ts
import { defineAction, z } from "astro:actions";

export const server = {
  newsletter: defineAction({
    accept: "form",
    input: z.object({
      email: z.string().email(),
      receivePromo: z.boolean(),
    }),
    handler: async ({ email, receivePromo }) => {
      // call a mailing service, or store to a database
      return { success: true };
    },
  }),
};
```

> You can call actions from any client component using the `actions` object from `astro:actions`. You can pass a type-safe object when using JSON, or a `FormData` object when using `accept: 'form'`. You can also use `getActionProps()` for progressive enhancement:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can call actions from any on-demand rendered client component using the `actions` object from `astro:actions`. You can pass a type-safe object when using JSON, or a `FormData` object when using `accept: 'form'`. You can also use `getActionProps()` for progressive enhancement:
```
Just to match saying that one of the server modes is required! This is where it matters!

Reviewer 2: Ah, that's actually incorrect! You can _call_ actions from statically rendered pages. You only need server rendering for the actions themselves.

```jsx
// src/components/newsletter.tsx
import { actions, getActionProps } from "astro:actions";

export function Newsletter() {
  return (
    <form
      method="POST"
      onSubmit={async (e) => {
        e.preventDefault();
        const formData = new FormData(e.target);
        const result = await actions.newsletter(formData);
      }}
    >
      <input {...getActionProps(actions.newsletter)} />
      <label for="email">Email</label>
      <input name="email" type="email" id="email" />

      <label for="receivePromo">Receive promotional emails</label>
      <input name="receivePromo" type="checkbox" id="receivePromo" checked />

      <button type="submit">Sign Up</button>
    </form>
  );
}
```

For more information on Astro actions, visit [the experimental actions docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/configuration-reference/#experimentalactions).

## Experimental: Request Rewriting

> Astro 4.8 introduces experimental support for Request rewriting. Rewriting is a routing feature that allows you to show the content of a different page from the current URL. This can be useful for showing different content based on the user's location, device, or other conditions without needing multiple different URLs. This feature is sometimes also called "rerouting" in other frameworks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro 4.8 introduces experimental support for `Request` rewriting. Rewriting is a routing feature that allows you to show the content of a different page from the current URL. This can be useful for customizing content based on the user's location, device, or other conditions without needing multiple, different URLs. This feature is sometimes also called "rerouting" in other frameworks.
```
- If talking about the standard `Request` object, we'd typically inline code that thing (Is that the case here?)
- Maybe we only need one of "multiple" and "different"? If you do want to emphasize both words, then a comma goes here.
- suggested a change to "customizing content" just to avoid two "different" one right after the other.

Author: I would argue that it should be `request rewriting` here, because the concept isn't really specific to `Request`!

```js
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    rewriting: true,
  },
});
```

From your pages and endpoints, you can then access a `rewrite()` method on the Astro global or context object:

```astro
---
if (!Astro.props.allowed) {
	return Astro.rewrite("/")
}
---
```

```ts
export function GET(ctx) {
  if (!ctx.locals.allowed) {
    return ctx.rewrite("/");
  }
}
```

This feature can also be used inside middlewares, by passing a parameter to the `next()` method with the same type as the `rewrite` method.

```ts
export function onRequest(ctx, next) {
  if (!ctx.cookies.get("allowed")) {
    return next("/");
  }
  return next();
}
```

For more information on rewriting, visit [the experimental rewriting docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/configuration-reference/#experimentalrewriting).

## Performance improvements

Thanks to the recent hard work from [@bluwy](https://github.com/bluwy) both across the JavaScript ecosystem and in Astro itself, Astro is faster than ever! This release includes a number of performance improvements, cutting build and rendering times across the board.

> In our own benchmarks, we've observed build times improve by up to 20% in specific cases. No changes are needed to take advantage of these improvements, just upgrade to Astro 4.8 and enjoy the faster builds!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our own benchmarks, we've observed build times improve by up to 20% in specific cases. No changes are needed to take advantage of these improvements—just upgrade to Astro 4.8 and enjoy the faster builds!
```
An em dash for Nate!

## Ability to define multiple routes with the same entrypoint

Astro integration authors discovered that trying to inject multiple routes with the same entrypoint using the [`injectRoute`](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/integrations-reference/#injectroute-option) function would result in an unintended behavior at build time where the last injected route would override the previous ones.

This issue has existed since the introduction of the `injectRoute` function, almost two years ago (in Astro 1.0), but thanks to a contribution by [@goulvenclech](https://github.com/goulvenclech), it is now finally fixed in Astro 4.8!

> With our thriving developer community and so many new integrations being built all the time, it's important to us that Astro is a great platform for building integrations and we are pleased that this paves the way for even more integrations in the future!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With our thriving developer community and so many new integrations being built all the time, it's important to us that Astro is a great platform to build for and we are pleased that this paves the way for even more integrations in the future!
```
Sounds great! To avoid repeating integrations so many times, *could* replace with:

"Astro is a great platform to build for"
"Astro is a great platform to build on top of"
"Astro is a great platform for builders"
etc. 
Whatever sounds right to you!

---
title: "Astro 4.8"
description: "Astro 4.8 is here! This release includes experimental support for Astro actions and rewriting, performance improvements, and more."
publishDate: "May 9, 2024"
authors:
  - erika
  - ema
  - matthew
  - nate
  - bjorn
  - sarah
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-480/header_astro_4_8.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-480/og_image_4_8.webp"
lang: "en"
---

import BlogSummary from "/src/components/BlogSummary.astro";

<BlogSummary>
Astro 4.8 is out now! This release includes experimental support for Astro actions and rewriting, performance improvements, and more.
</BlogSummary>

Full release highlights include:

- [**Experimental: Astro Actions**](#experimental-astro-actions)

> - [**Experimental: Rewriting support**](#experimental-rewriting-support)

Reviewer 3: What about *Request rewriting*? Just trying to think of a more-specific title here.

- [**Performance improvements**](#performance-improvements)
- [**Ability to define multiple routes with the same entrypoint**](#ability-to-define-multiple-routes-with-the-same-entrypoint)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

> ## Experimental: Astro Actions

Reviewer: No real preference here, but did you decide on calling them "Astro actions"?  I notice that we don't say "Actions API" here anywhere, which is one way we can be referring to the feature (with a capital A!) if we need to vary language use so we're not saying the same thing over and over again.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I don't think we want to use Actions API! That is easily confused with API endpoints. Astro Actions or simply Actions were the two ways we intended for docs.

This release includes the first preview for a long awaited feature: Astro actions! Actions make it easy to define and call backend functions with full type-safety from your client code.

To use this feature, first enable the `experimental.actions` option in your Astro config:

```js
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
	experimental: {
		actions: true
	}
})
```

Then, define actions in the `src/actions/index.ts` file using the `defineAction` function from `astro:actions`. You can define actions that accept JSON or form requests, and the `handler` function will be called with the parsed input and the context object:

```ts
// src/actions/index.ts
import { defineAction, z } from "astro:actions";

export const server = {
  like: defineAction({
    // accept json
    input: z.object({ postId: z.string() }),
    handler: async ({ postId }, context) => {
      // ... update likes in db
      return likes;
    },
  }),

>   comment: defineAction({

Reviewer 3: Might be more succinct to pick one of the examples to show rather than showing 2. You could do: `comment: defineAction({ ... })` if you just want to allude to the fact that multiple actions can be exported.

Author: Yes, waiting on an example from Ben here.

```jsx
// src/components/blog.tsx
import { actions } from "astro:actions";
import { useState } from "preact/hooks";

export function Like({ postId }: { postId: string }) {
  const [likes, setLikes] = useState(0);
  return (
    <button
      onClick={async () => {
        const newLikes = await actions.like({ postId });
        setLikes(newLikes);
      }}
    >
      {likes} likes
    </button>
  );
}

export function Comment({ postId }: { postId: string }) {
  return (
    <form
      onSubmit={async (e) => {
        e.preventDefault();
        const formData = new FormData(e.target);
        const result = await actions.blog.comment(formData);
        // handle result
      }}
    >
      <input type="hidden" name="postId" value={postId} />
      <label for="author">Author</label>
      <input id="author" type="text" name="author" />
      <textarea rows={10} name="body"></textarea>
      <button type="submit">Post</button>
    </form>
  );
}
```

> For more information on Astro actions, visit [TODO: link to docs].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on Astro actions, visit [the experimental actions docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/configuration-reference/#experimentalsecurity).
```
This should be the link! I'll check again at the last minute!

Reviewer 2: Oh, that links to a different experimental flag 😄 It should be `#experimentalactions` right?

## Experimental: Rewriting support

> Astro 4.8 introduces experimental support for rewriting. Rerouting allows you to show the content of a different page from the current URL. This can be useful for showing different content based on the user's location, device, or other conditions, without needing multiple different URLs. This feature is sometimes also called "rerouting" in other frameworks.

Reviewer: I do think having *some* other word with rewriting *feels* better, whatever is correct. (and optionally a way to sneak "routing" in there?) But I know Matthew researched and most frameworks do call this feature rewriting, so it may not be necessary.

```suggestion
Astro 4.8 introduces experimental support for Request rewriting. Rewriting is a routing feature that allows you to show the content of a different page from the current URL. This can be useful for showing different content based on the user's location, device, or other conditions without needing multiple different URLs. This feature is sometimes also called "rerouting" in other frameworks.
```

> To enable this feature, enable the `experimental.rewriting` option in your Astro config:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable this feature, configure the `experimental.rewriting` option in your Astro config:
```

```js
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    rewriting: true
  }
})
```

> From your pages, you can then access a `rewrite` method on the Astro global or context object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From your pages and endpoints, you can then access a `rewrite()` method on the Astro global or context object:
```
We do also mention endpoints explicitly in the docs, so just in case you want that here!

```astro
---
if (!Astro.props.allowed) {
	return Astro.rewrite("/")
}
---
```

```ts
export function GET(ctx) {
	if (!ctx.locals.allowed) {
		return ctx.rewrite("/")
	}
}
```

> This feature can also be used inside middlewares, by passing a parameter to the `next()` method with the same type as the `rewrite` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature can also be used inside middleware, by passing a parameter to the `next()` method with the same type as the `rewrite` method.
```
I don't think it's wrong either way. I *think* my ear wants to hear singular/generic here? Your call, just pointing it out.

Author: I think I like it better with the plural here personally!

```ts
export function onRequest(ctx, next) {
	if (!ctx.cookies.get("allowed")) {
		return next("/")
	}
	return next();
}
```

> For more information on rewriting, visit [TODO: link to docs].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on rewriting, visit [the experimental rewriting docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/configuration-reference/#experimentalrewriting).
```

## Performance improvements

> Thanks to the recent hard work from [@bluwy](https://github.com/bluwy) both across the JavaScript ecosystem and in Astro itself, Astro is faster than ever! This release includes a number of performance improvements, improving build and rendering times across the board.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to the recent hard work from [@bluwy](https://github.com/bluwy) both across the JavaScript ecosystem and in Astro itself, Astro is faster than ever! This release includes a number of performance improvements, cutting build and rendering times across the board.
```
Just two "improve" words next to each other.
 
I kind of like the high energy of "cutting" but could be "shortening", "reducing" etc.

In our own benchmarks, we've observed build times improve by up to 20% in specific cases. No changes are needed to take advantage of these improvements, just upgrade to Astro 4.8 and enjoy the faster builds!

## Ability to define multiple routes with the same entrypoint

> Previously, trying to inject multiple routes with the same entrypoint using the [`injectRoute`](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/integrations-reference/#injectroute-option) function would result in an unintended behavior at build time where the last injected route would override the previous ones. This issue has existed since the introduction of the `injectRoute` function, almost two years ago (in Astro 1.0), and is now finally fixed in Astro 4.8.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro integration authors discovered that trying to inject multiple routes with the same entrypoint using the [`injectRoute`](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/integrations-reference/#injectroute-option) function would result in an unintended behavior at build time where the last injected route would override the previous ones. This issue has existed since the introduction of the `injectRoute` function, almost two years ago (in Astro 1.0). With our thriving developer community and so many new integrations being built all the time, it was finally time to fix this. We are pleased that this paves the way for even more integrations in the future!
```
OK, just a random attempt to put a bit of a story on this to add to the "finally fixed" narrative. We *could* position it with a nod to integrations, encourage people to build and keep building them etc. Just one idea of how that could look.

Author: It's a little bit long imo, but I'll play with it as a starting point
